Managing a Thread.
Once a new thread is started, there are a number of properties and methods that can be called to manage it.
The isAlive property returns true until the thread ends.
Each thread has a Name property useful for debugging.
Thread.CurrentThread gives you the currently executing thread.
A running thread can be paused using Thread.Sleep method.
You can wait for another thread to end by calling its Join methode.
You check to see if a thread is blocked by checking its ThreadState property.
A thread's Priority property determins how much execution time it gets relative to other threads.

There are two types of threads.
Foreground threads and Background threads.
Foreground threads keep the application alive for as long as they are running.
when completed, the aplication ends and any background threads terminate immediately.
By default, threads that are explicityly created are foreground threads.

Background threads are terminated automatically when all foreground threads are closed or completed.
a background thread can be created by setting the IsBackground property to true.
IsBackground can also be used to change a threads statu from Background to Foreground.
Background threads are excellent for tasks like polling servcies or logging info.

Thread Pool.
Starting a new thread requires time and resources. normally a few hundred microseconds.
This can become noticeable if very many threads are being creatd for short operations.
The ThreadPool avoids this overhead by maintaining a pool of pre-created, recyclable threads.

There are a few things to consider about the ThreadPool.
you cannot set the Name of a pooled thread, making debugging more difficult.
Pooled Threads are always background threads.
Blocking pooled threads can degrade performance.
a pooled threads priority can be changed. it will be restored to normal when released back to the pool.

The Task.Run method is new in the dot Net Framework four dot five.
It strats a task that is executed on a thread from the ThreadPool.
Remeber that threads from the Thread Pool are background threads.


